README.md, before:

<p align="center">
  <img src="device images/hero-img.jpg" alt="Toasty Filament Dryer" width="250">
</p>

<h1 align="center">Toasty Filament Dryer</h1>
<h3 align="center">An Arduino powered 3D printer filament drying controller</h3>

## Description

**Toasty** is a DIY, Arduino Nano–based controller that turns a household **220 V AC food dehydrator** into a reliable **3D-printer filament dryer**.
It uses an **AHT21 temperature/humidity sensor**, a **20×4 I²C LCD**, **four push buttons**, a **5 V active-HIGH relay**, and a **5 V buzzer**. The firmware includes preset **temperature/humidity targets** for common filaments and a **Hold Mode** that prevents re-moisture after the timer ends.

---

## 🎯 Objective

* Deliver a **low-cost, beginner-friendly** controller for consistent filament drying.
* Keep material **within safe temperature** while reducing humidity.
* Provide **ready-made profiles** for popular materials and allow easy tweaks.
* Support **continuous drying/storage** for up to **3 spools** inside a modified dehydrator.

---

## ✅ Benefits

* Reduces **stringing, bubbles, and warping** by removing moisture.
* Extends the life of engineering filaments.
* Reuses a **modified 220 V AC dehydrator** as the drying chamber.
* Controller runs on a **safe 5 V/2 A DC** supply, isolated from mains.
* **Hold Mode** keeps air moving after the timer to avoid re-wetting.
* Buildable with **intermediate → beginner** electronics skills.

---

## ✨ Features

* **8 material profiles** (PLA, PETG/CPE/PCTG, ABS, ASA, TPU, Nylon, PC, PP).
* **20×4 I²C LCD** status UI with centered error messages.
* **Four buttons** (OK / UP / DOWN / CANCEL) with **external pull-downs** (pressed = HIGH).
* **Active-HIGH relay** (no beeps on relay changes; buzzer for UI/errors).
* **Separate hysteresis** for temperature and humidity.
* **User-visible timer**; when it ends, system enters **Hold Mode**.

---

## 🔌 Hardware Overview

**Core:** Arduino Nano
**Sensor:** AHT21 (Adafruit AHTX0) @ **I²C 0x38**
**LCD:** 20×4 I²C @ **0x27**
**Power:** **5 V/2 A DC** (controller) + **220 V AC** (dehydrator heater/fan via relay)

### ⚙️ Circuit Diagram / Schematics  

📁 **File Path:** [`Open`](Circuit_Schematic.pdf)  

## 🖥️ Arduino Code  

📁 **File Path:** [`Open`](main.ino)





### Pin Mapping

| Function      | Pin   | Notes                                  |
| ------------- | ----- | -------------------------------------- |
| OK Button     | D3    | External pull-down; pressed = **HIGH** |
| UP Button     | D4    | External pull-down; pressed = **HIGH** |
| DOWN Button   | D5    | External pull-down; pressed = **HIGH** |
| CANCEL        | D6    | External pull-down; pressed = **HIGH** |
| Relay Out     | D7    | **Active-HIGH** (HIGH = ON)            |
| Buzzer        | D9    | UI/error beeps only                    |
| I²C (LCD+AHT) | A4/A5 | SDA = A4, SCL = A5 (Arduino Nano)      |

> **Mains note:** The relay must switch the **220 V AC** line to the dehydrator’s heater/fan. Keep low-voltage and mains wiring **well isolated**.

---

## 🧰 Bill of Materials (BOM)

* Arduino Nano (or compatible)
* AHT21 sensor module (Adafruit AHTX0 compatible)
* 20×4 I²C LCD @ 0x27
* 4 × momentary push buttons + external pull-down resistors
* 5 V **active-HIGH** relay module (mains-rated, proper isolation)
* 5 V buzzer
* 5 V/2 A DC power supply (controller board)
* Modified **220 V AC** food dehydrator (drying chamber)
* Enclosure, wiring, terminal blocks, heat-shrink, etc.

---

## 📋 Supported Filament Profiles

| ID | Filament           | Set Temp (°C) | Target RH (%) | Max Run Time |
| -- | ------------------ | ------------- | ------------- | ------------ |
| 1  | PLA                | **45**        | **10**        | **6 h**      |
| 2  | PETG / CPE / PCTG  | **68**        | **10**        | **5 h**      |
| 3  | ABS                | **75**        | **10**        | **3 h**      |
| 4  | ASA                | **75**        | **10**        | **3 h**      |
| 5  | TPU                | **52**        | **10**        | **7 h**      |
| 6  | Nylon              | **80**        | **5**         | **12 h**     |
| 7  | Polycarbonate (PC) | **95**        | **5**         | **5 h**      |
| 8  | Polypropylene (PP) | **65**        | **10**        | **5 h**      |

**Hysteresis (defaults):** `tempHys = 1.5 °C`, `humHys = 3 %RH`

> Tune inside `loadProfile(id)` or via the globals near the top of the sketch.

---

## ⚙️ How It Works

1. **Boot & Sensor Check** — Initializes AHT21 and LCD. If the sensor is missing, shows a centered **ERROR: AHT21 not found**, beeps, and locks out with the relay OFF.
2. **Home Screen** — Shows “Toasty Filament Dryer” and live **T/H** readings.
3. **Profile Menu** — Press **OK** to open the selector (1–8). Navigate with **UP/DOWN**, **OK** to start, **CANCEL** to exit.
4. **Run** — Control loop maintains setpoints using independent hysteresis for temperature and humidity.
5. **Timer** — A user-visible countdown runs (it does not hard-stop the run).
6. **Hold Mode** — When the timer ends, the display shows **Done (Hold)** and the relay continues as required to prevent re-moisture.
7. **Stop Anytime** — Press **CANCEL** to stop; relay turns OFF and the system returns to Home.

---

## 🔄 Control Structure

* **Relay ON** when
  `t ≤ setTemp − tempHys` **AND** `h ≥ setHum + humHys`

* **Relay OFF** when
  `t ≥ setTemp` **OR** `h ≤ setHum`

* Otherwise (between bands), the relay **holds its last state**

---

## 🖥️ Software

**Language:** Arduino C++
**Libraries:**

```
Wire
Adafruit_AHTX0
LiquidCrystal_I2C
```

### Build & Flash

1. Install libraries via Arduino Library Manager.
2. Select **Arduino Nano (ATmega328P)** in the IDE.
3. Open the provided `main.ino` file.
4. Compile & Upload.

### Customization

* Edit `loadProfile(id)` to tune **Set Temp**, **Target RH**, and **Max Run Time**.
* Adjust `tempHys` / `humHys` for responsiveness vs. stability.
* UI strings live in `showHomeHeader`, `showRunHeader`, etc.
* Error messages are pre-centered for a **20×4** LCD.

---

## 📐 Circuit Schematic

<img width="570" height="400" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ad3ba50e-b9e1-4646-bb30-19890a5fa1a0" />


## 📸 Images

<img width="420" height="400" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/51e9b04e-c7ac-436f-8f6b-b34c47683573" />
<img width="450" height="370" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a28cde18-25f6-4d38-bafe-fa18de0a5f75" />




---

## 🧪 Operation Tips

* **PLA:** Default **Set Temp = 45 °C**. If your unit overshoots, reduce the setpoint or improve airflow.
* **Nylon/PC:** High temps—confirm your dehydrator/enclosure can handle them safely.
* **Multi-spool storage:** Keep **Hold Mode** active between prints to prevent re-wetting.

---

## 🛠️ Troubleshooting

* **AHT21 not found:** Check I²C wiring (SDA=A4, SCL=A5), address, power, and module pull-ups.
* **Relay always ON/OFF:** Verify **active-HIGH** wiring, pin **D7**, and thresholds.
* **LCD blank/garbled:** Confirm I²C address **0x27** and constructor `(0x27, 20, 4)`.
* **Buttons inverted:** Buttons must use **external pull-downs**; pressed = **HIGH**.

---

## ⚠️ Safety Note (Mains)

* The dehydrator’s heater/fan is **220 V AC**. Disconnect power before wiring.
* Enclose all mains parts; insulate and strain-relieve cables.
* Use a relay module **rated** for your load with proper isolation/clearances.
* Keep low-voltage and mains wiring **physically separated**.
* If unsure, consult a qualified person.

---

## Reporting Issues & Contributions

Open **issues** and send **PRs** to improve docs, profiles, and wiring notes.

---

## 📜 License & Credits

Copyright © 2025 Abhijeet Kumar.
Licensed under **CC0-1.0** [`LICENSE`](LICENSE)

Hardware/firmware by **Toasty** project. Library credits: **Adafruit AHTX0**, **LiquidCrystal_I2C**.

Commit message:

Update README to remove code and add instructions
Removed Arduino code section and circuit diagram from README, added modification instructions and file download section.

README.md, after:

<p align="center">
  <img src="device images/hero-img.jpg" alt="Toasty Filament Dryer" width="250">
</p>

<h1 align="center">Toasty Filament Dryer</h1>
<h3 align="center">An Arduino powered 3D printer filament drying controller</h3>

## Description

**Toasty** is a DIY, Arduino Nano–based controller that turns a household **220 V AC food dehydrator** into a reliable **3D-printer filament dryer**.
It uses an **AHT21 temperature/humidity sensor**, a **20×4 I²C LCD**, **four push buttons**, a **5 V active-HIGH relay**, and a **5 V buzzer**. The firmware includes preset **temperature/humidity targets** for common filaments and a **Hold Mode** that prevents re-moisture after the timer ends.

---

## 🎯 Objective

* Deliver a **low-cost, beginner-friendly** controller for consistent filament drying.
* Keep material **within safe temperature** while reducing humidity.
* Provide **ready-made profiles** for popular materials and allow easy tweaks.
* Support **continuous drying/storage** for up to **3 spools** inside a modified dehydrator.

---

## ✅ Benefits

* Reduces **stringing, bubbles, and warping** by removing moisture.
* Extends the life of engineering filaments.
* Reuses a **modified 220 V AC dehydrator** as the drying chamber.
* Controller runs on a **safe 5 V/2 A DC** supply, isolated from mains.
* **Hold Mode** keeps air moving after the timer to avoid re-wetting.
* Buildable with **intermediate → beginner** electronics skills.

---

## ✨ Features

* **8 material profiles** (PLA, PETG/CPE/PCTG, ABS, ASA, TPU, Nylon, PC, PP).
* **20×4 I²C LCD** status UI with centered error messages.
* **Four buttons** (OK / UP / DOWN / CANCEL) with **external pull-downs** (pressed = HIGH).
* **Active-HIGH relay** (no beeps on relay changes; buzzer for UI/errors).
* **Separate hysteresis** for temperature and humidity.
* **User-visible timer**; when it ends, system enters **Hold Mode**.

---

## 🔌 Hardware Overview

**Core:** Arduino Nano
**Sensor:** AHT21 (Adafruit AHTX0) @ **I²C 0x38**
**LCD:** 20×4 I²C @ **0x27**
**Power:** **5 V/2 A DC** (controller) + **220 V AC** (dehydrator heater/fan via relay)

---


### Pin Mapping

| Function      | Pin   | Notes                                  |
| ------------- | ----- | -------------------------------------- |
| OK Button     | D3    | External pull-down; pressed = **HIGH** |
| UP Button     | D4    | External pull-down; pressed = **HIGH** |
| DOWN Button   | D5    | External pull-down; pressed = **HIGH** |
| CANCEL        | D6    | External pull-down; pressed = **HIGH** |
| Relay Out     | D7    | **Active-HIGH** (HIGH = ON)            |
| Buzzer        | D9    | UI/error beeps only                    |
| I²C (LCD+AHT) | A4/A5 | SDA = A4, SCL = A5 (Arduino Nano)      |

> **Mains note:** The relay must switch the **220 V AC** line to the dehydrator’s heater/fan. Keep low-voltage and mains wiring **well isolated**.

---

## 🧰 Bill of Materials (BOM)

* Arduino Nano (or compatible)
* AHT21 sensor module (Adafruit AHTX0 compatible)
* 20×4 I²C LCD @ 0x27
* 4 × momentary push buttons + external pull-down resistors
* 5 V **active-HIGH** relay module (mains-rated, proper isolation)
* 5 V buzzer
* 5 V/2 A DC power supply (controller board)
* Modified **220 V AC** food dehydrator (drying chamber)
* Enclosure, wiring, terminal blocks, heat-shrink, etc.


* 🔧 **Modification Instructions:**  
  Watch the tutorial video by **Christopher Lum** for guidance on adapting and extending this code for physical modification in the food dehydrator setup.  

  > 🎥 [YouTube – Christopher Lum: Turning a Food Dehydrator into a Filament Dryer](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nidkPN12M4I)) 

---

## 📋 Supported Filament Profiles

| ID | Filament           | Set Temp (°C) | Target RH (%) | Max Run Time |
| -- | ------------------ | ------------- | ------------- | ------------ |
| 1  | PLA                | **45**        | **10**        | **6 h**      |
| 2  | PETG / CPE / PCTG  | **68**        | **10**        | **5 h**      |
| 3  | ABS                | **75**        | **10**        | **3 h**      |
| 4  | ASA                | **75**        | **10**        | **3 h**      |
| 5  | TPU                | **52**        | **10**        | **7 h**      |
| 6  | Nylon              | **80**        | **5**         | **12 h**     |
| 7  | Polycarbonate (PC) | **95**        | **5**         | **5 h**      |
| 8  | Polypropylene (PP) | **65**        | **10**        | **5 h**      |

**Hysteresis (defaults):** `tempHys = 1.5 °C`, `humHys = 3 %RH`

> Tune inside `loadProfile(id)` or via the globals near the top of the sketch.

---

## ⚙️ How It Works

1. **Boot & Sensor Check** — Initializes AHT21 and LCD. If the sensor is missing, shows a centered **ERROR: AHT21 not found**, beeps, and locks out with the relay OFF.
2. **Home Screen** — Shows “Toasty Filament Dryer” and live **T/H** readings.
3. **Profile Menu** — Press **OK** to open the selector (1–8). Navigate with **UP/DOWN**, **OK** to start, **CANCEL** to exit.
4. **Run** — Control loop maintains setpoints using independent hysteresis for temperature and humidity.
5. **Timer** — A user-visible countdown runs (it does not hard-stop the run).
6. **Hold Mode** — When the timer ends, the display shows **Done (Hold)** and the relay continues as required to prevent re-moisture.
7. **Stop Anytime** — Press **CANCEL** to stop; relay turns OFF and the system returns to Home.

---

## 🔄 Control Structure

* **Relay ON** when
  `t ≤ setTemp − tempHys` **AND** `h ≥ setHum + humHys`

* **Relay OFF** when
  `t ≥ setTemp` **OR** `h ≤ setHum`

* Otherwise (between bands), the relay **holds its last state**

---

## 🖥️ Software

**Language:** Arduino C++
**Libraries:**

```
Wire
Adafruit_AHTX0
LiquidCrystal_I2C
```

### Build & Flash

1. Install libraries via Arduino Library Manager.
2. Select **Arduino Nano (ATmega328P)** in the IDE.
3. Open the provided `main.ino` file.
4. Compile & Upload.

### Customization

* Edit `loadProfile(id)` to tune **Set Temp**, **Target RH**, and **Max Run Time**.
* Adjust `tempHys` / `humHys` for responsiveness vs. stability.
* UI strings live in `showHomeHeader`, `showRunHeader`, etc.
* Error messages are pre-centered for a **20×4** LCD.

---

## 📐 Circuit Schematic

<img width="570" height="400" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ad3ba50e-b9e1-4646-bb30-19890a5fa1a0" />


## 📸 Images

<img width="420" height="400" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/51e9b04e-c7ac-436f-8f6b-b34c47683573" />
<img width="450" height="370" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a28cde18-25f6-4d38-bafe-fa18de0a5f75" />




---

## 🧪 Operation Tips

* **PLA:** Default **Set Temp = 45 °C**. If your unit overshoots, reduce the setpoint or improve airflow.
* **Nylon/PC:** High temps—confirm your dehydrator/enclosure can handle them safely.
* **Multi-spool storage:** Keep **Hold Mode** active between prints to prevent re-wetting.

---

## 🛠️ Troubleshooting

* **AHT21 not found:** Check I²C wiring (SDA=A4, SCL=A5), address, power, and module pull-ups.
* **Relay always ON/OFF:** Verify **active-HIGH** wiring, pin **D7**, and thresholds.
* **LCD blank/garbled:** Confirm I²C address **0x27** and constructor `(0x27, 20, 4)`.
* **Buttons inverted:** Buttons must use **external pull-downs**; pressed = **HIGH**.

---

## ⚠️ Safety Note (Mains)

* The dehydrator’s heater/fan is **220 V AC**. Disconnect power before wiring.
* Enclose all mains parts; insulate and strain-relieve cables.
* Use a relay module **rated** for your load with proper isolation/clearances.
* Keep low-voltage and mains wiring **physically separated**.
* If unsure, consult a qualified person.

---

## File Download

### ⚙️ Circuit Diagram / Schematics  

📁 **File Path:** [`Open`](Circuit_Schematic.pdf)  

## 🖥️ Arduino Code  

📁 **File Path:** [`Open`](main.ino)

---



## Reporting Issues & Contributions

Open **issues** and send **PRs** to improve docs, profiles, and wiring notes.

---

## 📜 License & Credits

Copyright © 2025 Abhijeet Kumar.
Licensed under **CC0-1.0** [`LICENSE`](LICENSE)

Hardware/firmware by **Toasty** project. Library credits: **Adafruit AHTX0**, **LiquidCrystal_I2C**.
